Title: Zone de sacrifice

----

Text:

“One day, at the Ironbound Community Corporation, we smelled something pungent. Wherever you pass over the Ironbound, the main sight will be smokestacles. My whole life, I had smelled this smell. My colleagues said we had to call it in to the Department of Environmental Protection. That was when I started realising that I’ve known that smell my whole life but never thought of it as a problem. That smell made me realise the difference between neighbourhoods like Newark and the suburbs, where there are all these trees and the air actually smells clean. Racial justice has always been a part of my life, but at that moment I realised how insidious environmental racism truly is”. These words were written by Maria Lopez-Nuñez, a (link: https://www.newyorker.com/news/annals-of-a-warming-planet/where-we-stand-on-climate text: Honduran-American activist) who has been fighting for years for environmental justice in the Ironbound district of Newark, New Jersey. The neighbourhood is infamously known for its “chemical corridor”, a one-mile stretch where “you pass a natural gas plant next to a sewage treatment facility next to an animal fat rendering plant next to a series of ominous looking chemical storage containers behind acres of fencing. Airplanes pass overhead every two minutes, their engines rattling windows, while a putrid smell wafts from the open pools at the sewage treatment plant.” The area is inhabited by Portuguese, Brazilian, Central American, African American and low-income white people: their fight to “break the cycle of poor communities of colour serving as dumping grounds for our consumer society” is the subject of 2020’s documentary (link: https://thesacrificezone.org/ text: The Sacrifice Zone: Life in an Industrial Wasteland).

The notion of “sacrifice zone” dates back to the Cold War, when the nuclear arms race between the US and USSR left behind a scourge of territories – many of which inhabited –contaminated by nuclear testing and uranium mining. In recent years, the term “sacrifice zone” has been circulating within environmental activism to the point of being included in a (link: https://www.scienzainrete.it/files/G2200448.pdf text: major UN report) in 2022 “on the issue of human rights obligations relating to the enjoyment of a safe, clean, healthy and sustainable environment”. In this document, sacrifice zones are defined as “extremely contaminated areas where vulnerable and marginalised groups bear a disproportionate burden of the health, human rights and environmental consequences of exposure to pollution and hazardous substances”. But why use the very word “sacrifice”? And the burden that communities have to bear is “disproportionate” to whom?

The issue at stake in these zones is not only the contamination of populated territories but the fact that communities living in these areas pay the price for a form of consumerism and lifestyle that they cannot access and that is enjoyed by privileged groups of people who live in other areas, without having to pay the consequences themselves; a price in terms of health and human rights that mirrors the disparities of class in the globalised world. From the unbelievable levels of pollution due to oil and gas flaring in the Niger Delta, to the unregulated landfills that are spread all over the world, to the emissions of the Ilva steel plant in Taranto, the UN report recounts a widespread and desolating phenomenon that underpins our economic system.