Title: Zone de sacrifice 2

----

Text:

This situation does not, as mentioned, only concern the Global South, but also the weaker communities of the Global North which marginalisation, racialisation and media disregard keep at a distance from any form of protection. The most heavily polluting and hazardous facilities, including open-cast mines, smelters, petroleum refineries, chemical plants, coal-fired power stations, oil- and gas fields, steel plants, garbage dumps and hazardous waste incinerators, as well as clusters of these facilities, tend to be located in close proximity to poor and marginalised communities. When an industry with a heavy environmental impact seeks an area for the construction of a plant, on the one hand it will come up against the “not in my backyard” of the wealthier and more influential communities, while on the other hand it is likely to find acceptance in economically disadvantaged areas due to the promise of job creation and development.



A barrier to opposing these exploitative practices is the fact that soil, water and air contamination and their impact are often not immediately visible. As in Lopez-Nuñez’s account, certain conditions are not perceived as dangerous but rather as normal. Sometimes, people only begin to worry after years of exposure to environmental hazards – when industrial pollution-related diseases start to spread – and it is often too late for reparation. In his book Sacrifice Zones: The Front Lines of Toxic Chemical Exposure in the United States, Steve Lerner describes the feeling of powerlessness of one of these communities: “Once fenceline residents begin asking questions about the extent of the contamination, they frequently report that they get the run-around from officials and are rarely given straight answers or comprehensive information. They often later learn that both government and corporate personnel withheld the bad news about the extent of the contamination out of concern that it might create a panic. This deceitful, paternalistic behaviour makes it impossible for local residents to make timely and informed choices about whether to move immediately (if they can afford to), stop drinking water from wells, keep the windows closed, send their children to live with relatives in other neighbourhoods, prohibit their children from playing outdoors, avoid gardening or eating home-grown vegetables, or take other protective actions”.

The most dramatic contradiction, indeed, lies in the workers’ dilemma between keeping their jobs and risking their own and their families’ lives, or choosing to demonstrate for their rights, risking the relocation of toxic industries to other, perhaps less regulated areas. But both health and salary are needed to survive: unacceptable blackmail that is being played out on the shoulders of the weakest for the welfare of the most privileged. Nonetheless, de-industrialisation, i.e. the progressive reduction of employed people, is a tangible risk, which has left territories such as the Ruhr region in Germany in the grip of structural economic weakness without having initiated effective clean-ups or redevelopment operations – a fate shared by many heavy-industrial areas since the 1980s.

Eventually, Maria Lopez-Nuñez's tireless advocacy and the collective efforts of the Ironbound Community Corporation have achieved a significant milestone in the fight against environmental injustice. The (link: https://www.njleg.state.nj.us/bill-search/2020/S232/bill-text?f=S0500&n=232_U1 text: S232) Bill, hailed as a robust environmental-justice measure, stands as a beacon of progress in safeguarding communities facing intolerable environmental burdens. However, the struggle is far from over, as the insidious, structural nature of environmental disparities persists globally. As outlined in the UN report, “shareholders in polluting companies benefit from higher profits, while consumers benefit through lower-cost energy and goods. Prolonging the jobs of workers in polluting industries is used as a form of economic blackmail to delay the transition to a sustainable future, while the potential of green jobs is unjustifiably discounted. The continued existence of sacrifice zones is a stain upon the collective conscience of humanity”.